Syria Libya Iraq Iran Somalia Sudan and
Lebanon systematically the United States
has done netanyahu's bidding for almost
30 years now you're blaming Israel for
all of it I'm fine that's your view many
people would say no it's I I am I'm I'm
blaming Netanyahu in particular
overthrow governments in the
neighborhood expand the war draw the
United States in the US is always uh
available at Israel's behest you're
never quite so Keen to take a view that
is anti- dictators I mean Assad is a is
a pretty vile dictator it's sickening
I'm it's it's tiring because these wars
are disasterous you think the CIA would
launch a chemical weapons attack simply
to smear us
out of course it would are you kidding
it's done much worse than
that President Trump campaigned in part
on ending Putin's war on Ukraine and
Israel war on himass an escalating
crisis in Syria may now join that
bulging intro of foreign policy
headaches Rebel groups have seized
control of most of Aleppo shattering the
stalemate of a brutal war that never
formerly ended the attack is being led
by islamist militant group HTS which is
designated as a terror organization by
the United States and the UK among
others it appears to have caught
president Bashar al-assad and his allies
by surprise Putin's Russia have now
launched air strikes on Rebel command
centers in defense of alad but suddenly
of al-assad but suddenly the conflict is
red hot more than 300,000 people have
been killed since the Syrian Civil War
erupted in 2011 the resulting Exodus of
millions of Syrian refugees has had
profound consequences for Western
Politics the US has heavy fingerprints
on many of the key Junctions in this
conflict and could play a decisive role
in what happens next here to make sense
of it is Professor Jeffrey saak
Professor sax great to have you back on
unsensed great to be with you thank you
p I always get a tremendous amount of
feedback uh when you come on not all of
it entirely positive for me but that's
fine that's what a democracy is all
about um Let me let me just start with
your overview of what is happening in
Syria and how significant you think it
is I think it's uh interesting as you
pointed out the US calls HTS a terrorist
group but obviously the US is uh part of
what's Happening
these days Jake Sullivan said well yes
it's it's a terrorist group but it is
giving Assad a run for his money wink
wink uh this is a a US Israel turkey
operation uh it is part of netanyahu's
uh long-term game plan that goes on for
30 years to overthrow governments
throughout the Middle East that uh back
the Palestinian
and they did apparently catch both the
Russians and the Iranians and the
syrians off guard uh with this maneuver
in recent days at least that's uh what
seems to be the case but I'm sure that
this is an Israel us uh and Turkish
operation turkey has its own issues in
this with the Kurds uh in Syria uh for
Israel this is standard Fair overthrow
governments in the neighborhood expand
the war draw the United States in uh and
the US is always uh available at
Israel's behest to play games and expand
uh Wars and that's what we're seeing
right now from what we can gather uh of
of sporadic and of course Very
incomplete reports I I don't think that
is going to topple Assad there are
reinforcements pouring in from Iraq
probably from Iran probably the Syrian
forces as well internally are regrouping
after having been caught by surprise but
this is essentially at the core of
Netanyahu
operation what what is wrong with
theorizing that it might just be that
Syrian rebels represent a large body of
syrians who actually do want to
overthrow a a dictator that they believe
has had a malevolent effect on their
lives and they've chosen the moment to
do it when Assad's big backer Putin is
being massively stretched in the war in
Ukraine and they probably felt now's as
good a time as
ever yeah whatever may be true or not
about that Wars cost a lot of money they
require a lot of arm
they require a lot of logistics they
require a lot of intelligence I don't
mean mental intelligence I mean
information gathering and so forth and
uh Wars are not fought out of sentiment
Wars are fought with money and armaments
and therefore you can always find major
Powers Behind these wars and in the case
of Syria it was Obama in
2011 who tasked the CIA to work with the
Saudis at the time and with uh turkey at
the time to overthrow Assad this was at
Israel's behest in my understanding and
and interpretation but it required
billions of dollars from the US from
Saudi Arabia from Turkey Havens in
Turkey uh and so forth and it it's uh
this is the the normal Point these are
not sentiments against Assad these are
organized Wars uh and Wars are expensive
and that always means turn the attention
back to the major Powers whether it's
the regional powers or the United States
standing behind them what is really
interesting about the sort of modern
history of all this is I was a CNN when
the Arab Spring erupted soon after I
joined actually in in 2011 and a lot of
those uh leaders stroke dictators in
that region toppled um but Assad managed
to avoid it and I found a quote this is
Barack Obama president of the time of
course August the 20th 2012 talking
about his red line for Assad we have
been very clear to the Assad regime but
also to other players on the ground that
a red line for us is we start seeing a
whole bunch of chemical weapons moving
around or being utilized uh that would
change my calculus that would change my
equation now what happened is that
shortly after that that's exactly what
happened Assad used chemical weapons and
that as a result uh Obama was by his own
words obligated to do something about it
but didn't he ducked his own red line
and it was at that moment that Vladimir
Putin who I remember I'm sure you do as
well suddenly wrote an extra ordinarily
an opad piece in the New York Times of
all places um and then he moved into to
support Assad and effect effectively
took control as Assad's main supporter
in Syria and many people think that that
was the Catalyst for a lot of the
problems that Then followed is that an
accurate assessment of what happened you
think not not really although I did
witness some of that close up even at
the G20 in St Petersburg
around the time of these events what
this starts and it's it's really
fascinating to go back it starts in 1996
with Netanyahu who wrote a book called
fighting terrorism and the thesis of the
book is quite uh straightforward and and
uh very dangerous he says you know there
are there's Hamas there's Hezbollah they
oppose Israel it's not good for us to
fight them directly at that won't work
uh what we need to do is topple the
governments that that back them so what
we need is regime change throughout the
Middle East and he actually gave a long
list of seven countries uh that included
Syria Libya Iraq Iran Somalia Sudan and
Lebanon and
systematically uh the United States has
done nety who's bidding for almost 30
years now going to war with every one of
them except for the big one that
Netanyahu so much Longs for which is the
war directly between the United States
and Iran but the US went to war with
Syria in
2011 secretly of course this was what's
called operation Timber Sycamore it was
Obama assigning the CIA to overthrow
Assad overtly the United States
overthrew morar Gaddafi in 2011 it's
interesting peers to go back to
2002 this is after 911 of course to
watch Netanyahu has be being the lead
cheerleader for the US to overthrow
Saddam Hussein now we have a treasure
Trove of documents coming out that this
was really an a war on Israel behalf uh
everything about the weapons of mass
destruction was phony known to be phony
inside the US government but this was
the argument that was given and
Netanyahu was there in Washington
telling him it'll be just great if you
take out Saddam Hussein it's going to
topple all the rest of the governments
the idea was incidentally that Saddam
would be toppled and then the US
military would go right into Syria right
away but then an Insurgency trapped the
United States inside Iraq so that the
Syrian war was actually delayed 8 years
but what we're watching is this crazy
Netanyahu idea of regional War so that
Israel can have its its greater Israel
as they call it in other words
everything is to stop the Palestinian
cause and the US keeps being involved in
these Wars and there was Jake Sullivan
again today explaining yeah terrorists
terrorists who cares about terrorists
we're toppling Assad and this is again
for the Israel Lobby basically okay but
look you blame you're blaming Israel for
all of it I'm fine that's your view many
people would say no it's I am I'm I'm
blaming Netanyahu in particular right
and that's very clear but America uh
they would say look we've been actively
engaged in a lot of regime change and
attempted regime change in that region
for a specific reason these countries
are being run by malevolent dictators
who have a hatred of the United States
and we it's it's our in our
self-interest never mind anybody else's
I mean could the two things be true at
the same time yes it suits Netanyahu and
his bigger view of the region I'm sure
that's true um but it could also be
absolutely in
America's in their belief in America's
interests to do this I mean I don't
agree with them but it could it be that
that is a genuine belief on their
part I I agree with you that it's absurd
because what has it gotten us7 trillion
dollars of War spending massive debts
and Chaos throughout the Middle East
from Libya Syria Iraq uh Lebanon it's
it's complete bloodbath for for more
than 25 years now and so it doesn't
accomplish anything I think it's
extremely naive and I think it's
extremely wrongheaded and I yes I blame
Netanyahu for it he spelled it out it's
it's his strategy we're we've tried it
we we've done what he said we're doing
it today again in Syria it's a disaster
it's time to say run your own country
we'll run our country that's my view in
2018 we both wrote pieces about the
situation in Syria then I wrote mine for
the day male is after a suspected
chemical weapons attack in Duma uh in
Syria left dozens killed including many
young children I said that the use of
chemical weapons by Assad was on Obama's
conscience and it would ultimately
embolden only one man Vladimir Putin you
said on your website at the same time
the US and its allies should face
reality and accept the Persistence of
Assad's regime despicable as it may
be yeah one thing by the way p and
honestly you don't know and I don't know
there are there's a very
significant uh argument among very
knowledgeable people that the chemical
weapons was a false flag and if you know
American foreign policy uh false flags
are the essence of that hasn't been
proven as you know I mean that's just a
theory no it it it absolutely absolutely
not proven not proven either way
but I know experts that are real experts
who
say well they say at a minimum it's
absolutely not proven but some of them
say this is absolutely all of the
signature of a false flag operation and
some say this is why Obama didn't go
further because it was laid out to him
this was not even Assad doing this this
was the quote Rebels under CIA Authority
and if you study the CIA as I have for a
lifetime you know that
false flags are are actually their MO
they always are you seriously suggesting
Are you seriously suggesting that Barack
Obama and his government and the CIA
under his tenure launched a chemical or
weapons attack on Syrian people killing
a lot of civilians are you is do you
seriously think that's what
happened oh I'm I'm not saying that
Obama did it most of the time when the
CIA does things the president have no
idea what the CIA is doing but but you
think the CIA would launch a chemical
weapons attack simply to smear Us
ad of course it would are you kidding
it's done much worse than that it
launches coups assassinations Wars uh
the whole history of the United States
uh after 1947 is bring down
one here's my point what why are you
you're always very keen to take view
even if they're unproven that is very
anti- America you're never quite so Keen
to take a view that is anti- dictators I
mean Assad is a is a pretty vile
dictator Vladimir Putin is a vile
dictator do you accept that your your
views are I wouldn't say that they are
twisted but perhaps they're slightly
jaist by the fact that your instinct is
always the America's probably to blame
unless they can prove otherwise
no it's not whether they're dictators or
not it's what the United States role is
I don't believe that any country uh can
arrogate uh this uh uh task of bringing
down other countries governments the CIA
has been involved in probably 90 or 100
covert regime change operation since it
was founded in 1947
my whole life has been the United States
at War it's sickening I'm it's it's
tiring because these wars are disasters
so it's just not our business to say
that one's despicable that one has to go
but literally by the way this is what
Obama did I it's it's a shame that he
did this he said Assad must go yeah well
come on when when he said that by the
way in 20 2011 and 2012 and Hillary
Clinton said that I said oh my God here
we go again and literally appear it's
been 13 years of mass killing since then
no resolution at all completely
predictable this is what I'm
against on a point of principle when
Obama said if Assad uses chemical
weapons we will act and then didn't act
from a purely political perspective did
did that open the door for Putin to then
just come in and have significantly
higher influence in Syria and the region
than he would otherwise have
had well remember just on this one fact
uh because it's really important it it
it is said in our newspapers all the
time Russia intervened in Syria Russia
intervene in Syria Russia came into
Syria in
2015 the United States plan to overthrow
Assad dates to
2011 Russia came in four years afterward
we should never have done that this was
netanyahu's provocation he wanted Wars
in all those countries that I listed why
are we doing netanyahu's work when it is
a failure anyway so Russia didn't jump
in and we had to react Russia came in
four years after we started this we
started this because Syria was on
netanyahu's list and it was literally a
list by the way we know from this
remarkable story of uh the former NATO
Commander Wesley Clark the supreme
commander of NATO Wesley Clark went into
the Pentagon you know after 911 and he
was given the list of the seven
countries that we were going to take out
in five years this was netanyahu's
list yeah I mean I know Wy Clark well
the I wanted to ask you the ICC has
issued arrest warrants for Netanyahu do
you do you support
that of
course but France is top appeals I I
wish that i w i I wish that some
American presidents were on that list
right many many would agree with you but
I I was then going to ask that in June
this year France's top appeals court
ruled that there should be a arrest
warrant for
al-assad alleging his Alle alleged
conspiracy or complicity in crimes
against humanity and war crimes would
you support
that I support the IC and the icj and I
believe that we should try to make
international law work because we're
very close to Global self-destruction so
I would like international law to work
uh Putin is under an ICC warrant I would
like Russia to defend its proposition
that Putin's innocent or that Russia's
innocent or Israel to defend the
proposition that they're innocent this
is what a a a legal process should be
about I don't like it when countries say
no we don't support this or we don't
support that we should try to make these
International institutions work but have
full accountability
when the ICC threatened that it would
indict Netanyahu we had half the Senate
up in arms we're going to sanction these
judges we're going to end the court
we're going to penalize them no we
should have international law working
properly this would make a much for a
much more peaceful world actually I I
know you haven't specifically I don't I
don't believe by the way peers it's it's
not one country doing it for me what is
important is is that this should be
International I'm a Believer in the
United Nations maybe one of the few
right now uh I hope that's not true I
mean the UN actually has broad public
support but it can't function when great
powers are flagrantly uh ignoring its
its rule of law I believe that all the
great Powers should submit to the UN
Charter without their veto power
basically but just in relation to my
specific question about the France top
appeals court ruling an an arrest
warrant for alassad over very similar
allegation French Court yeah the is
France France's top appeals court in
June
2024 yeah I it look I mean a national
court is is not very interesting in this
regard France is one of the Imperial
powers of the Middle East uh is hardly
in a position to adjudicate uh about a
leader in the Middle East it would be
interesting to have a a good historical
adjudication of France's role which has
been disastrous but I I believe what we
should be focusing on is international
uh courts we have two of them uh the icj
and the IC and we should be helping to
make those two un-based courts work me
ask you briefly about Ukraine very
interestingly um president zalinski at
the weekend an interview with Stuart
Ramsey at Sky News said
this one alternative perhaps uh again
this is is is reported from the United
States and it's fairly simple really is
that Ukraine joins
NATO but
Russia takes control and keeps the land
that it has to
date would that be a
possibility no one has offered us to be
in NATO with just one part or another
part of
Ukraine that's for once the fact is that
it is a solution to stop the hot stage
of the war because we can just give the
NATO membership to the part of Ukraine
that is under our
control yes it could be possible but no
one offer it what struck me is most
interesting about that when I
interviewed zalinski uh two years ago in
ke he was never he said prepared to even
concede an inch of territory to Russia
it seemed there was a real change in
tone in his uh response to that question
at the weekend did you did you detect
that and what does it all
mean well it doesn't mean very much
because it puts everything uh upside
down in terms of the
real understanding of Ukraine and the
war the war is because of NATO
enlargement
again we've talked about this but this
goes back 30 years it goes back to a
very bad idea of is big binski uh who
wrote and described all of this in
detail in a book in 1997 called the
Grand chessboard that we will expand
NATO and Russia will have no alternative
but to exceed to that and all the top
diplomats said no this is a provocation
this will be war and binski analyzes of
course wrongly but he analyzes in detail
in one of the chapters of the book that
Russia has no choice it will never side
with China it will never side with Iran
and blah blah blah blah blah gets
everything wrong but in any event this
has been a war of NATO enlargement
Russia does not want NATO on its border
especially with the United States out of
the anti-ballistic missile treaty which
it unilaterally abandoned in 2002 out of
the intermediate nuclear force treaty
which the United States unilaterally
abandoned in 2019 Russia does not want
NATO on its border it does not want us
missile systems on its border this is
the basic point the same reason why the
United States invaded Cuba in 1960 and
why we had the Cuban Missile 61 excuse
me and the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962
they didn't want the Soviet Union
anywhere close to the United States and
if we just had a little bit of sense
peers we would understand this and this
war never would have taken place in this
territory never would even be in
question because Russia wasn't claiming
the donbas it was claiming keep NATO
away and then under the Minsk agreement
was well give them autonomy yes it's
Ukrainian but let the Russian ethnic
speakers be safe and have their own
language uh be able to speak Russian so
this is not about territory and we
continue to believe it because Boris
Johnson and uh and Joe Biden and Jake
Sullivan know what this is about and as
Boris Johnson keeps saying this is about
the preservation of Western heany for
God's sake well yeah if you're going to
have that we're going to have Perpetual
War uh this is what this is about it's
about does the United States have the
right to put its military bases and its
missile systems right up against
Russia's border Russia says no the
United States says yes article 10 of
NATO says yes it's none of Russia's
business and therefore we're at War
zalinski either
is I don't know what but this is
completely irrelevant this discussion
but what is being floated is the US plan
the US plan is yeah we get NATO okay you
keep the D BS but we get NATO it's not
going to work it is absolutely not going
to work it's just the US and UK talking
to themselves not really admitting what
this war is about fundamentally so how
does it
end it ends the day that uh that that
Trump picks up the phone and says
President Putin that whole idea of NATO
enlargement was a terrible idea let's
make Ukraine neutral it's it will keep
the space between us uh and uh the rest
is details frankly That's How It Ends it
and if if uh if if Trump is clever
enough to understand that CU half his
AIDS know it the other half say exactly
the opposite but if Trump is clever
enough to know that the war is going to
end right away and how do you think
Israel Hamas war
ends I I hope that the whole world
finally says Israel you have no right to
veto a Palestinian State and the US
drops its veto in the UN Security
Council because it's the last whole out
and we vote that a state of Palestine
exists on the borders of the 4th of June
1967 and I have met with leaders all
across the Middle East and all
throughout the Islamic world and they're
ready to have normal peaceful relations
with Israel to stop the belligerency
with capital in East Jerusalem and
that's what I wholeheartedly
support Professor Jeffrey saaks we' run
out of time I could talk to you for
hours uh I hope you come back again I
got to say even though I don't always
agree with your
interpretation of things I uh I always
learn a lot of stuff when I talk to you
I find it fascinating so thank you very
much indeed for joining me great great
to be with you thank thanks a lot Pierce
appreciate it